[docs] Packed Rows (#15750)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/architecture/docdb/persistence.md

We use a binary-comparable encoding to translate the value for each YCQL type to strings that go to the KV-Store.

> ## Packed Row format (Beta)

Reviewer: do we need to call this Beta here?

Author: Yes, thats how most features are labelled right? Will switch it out of Beta once 2.16.1 ships.

> ## Packed Row format (Beta)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Packed row format (Beta)
```

A row corresponding to the user table is stored as multiple key value pairs in the DocDB. For
example, A row with one primary key and n non-key columns - K (primary key)  |  C1  | C2  | ………  |

> Cn, would be stored as n key value pairs - <K, C1> <K, C2> .... <K, Cn>. 

Reviewer: it it n? or n+1, with an explicit liveness row?

Author: Didn't get into the nuances of liveness row. Will add it in the subsequent iteration, so as to not block on this change.

With packed row format, it would be stored as a single key value pair <K, packed {C1, C2...Cn}>.

While UDTs can be used to achieve the packed row format at the application level, native support for
packed row format has the following benefits:
* Lower storage footprint.
* Efficient INSERTs, especially when a table has large number of columns.

> * Faster bulk ingestion.

Reviewer: is this separate from the efficient inserts?

Author: I guess I meant to say - bulk inserts. But if this is not coming across, then I'll remove this line.

> * Faster multi-column reads, as the reads now need to fetch fewer key value pairs.

Reviewer: should we frame this in comparison to UDTs? eg: since UDTs would have to always deserialize the whole payload, regardless of number of columns read?

Author: The statement is true even for the regular, non-UDT case. DocDbIterator needs to perform fewer operations than before.

> * Faster multi-column reads, as the reads now need to fetch fewer key value pairs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Faster multi-column reads, as the reads need to fetch fewer key value pairs.
```

> * UDTs require application rewrite, and thus are not necessarily an option for everyone, like latency sensitive update workloads.

Reviewer: I almost feel like an application re-write could be it's standalone point
while latency sensitive updates could be a separate point -- but we'd need to call out how updates work in general and how they stay the same for packed

Author: The 'Design' section talks about the updates. Updates work the same as before and the lookup part of the update might be faster (that point is already captured above. Do you think its worth adding additional references to update perf here?

The packed row format can be enabled using the following gflags.

**ysql_enable_packed_row** - Whether packed row is enabled for YSQL (false by default).

> **ysql_packed_row_size_limit** - Packed row size limit for YSQL. The default value is 0 (use block size as limit). For rows that are over the size limit, their columns will not be packed, but be stored as individual key value pairs instead.

Reviewer: to confirm, so if the row is over the limit, none of the columns get packed? I thought we do some greedy packing of all that fit?

Author: ack. Updated.

**ycql_enable_packed_row** - Whether packed row is enabled for YCQL (false by default).

> **ycql_packed_row_size_limit** - Packed row size limit for YCQL. The default value is 0 (use block size as limit).

Reviewer: should we repeat the verbiage from above?

Author: ack. updated.

> **ysql_enable_packed_row_for_colocated_table** - Whether packed row is enabled for colocated table in YSQL (false by default).

Reviewer: should we callout a GH issue as to why this exists?

Author: Moving this to another page, so will update it there.

> ### Design aspects of packed row format

Reviewer: should we also callout
- once data is packed, we currently do not support unpacking it
- anything about schema version being retained per row
- clarification on select, that point lookups should be about as fast as non-packed, as we still fundamentally only seek to one KV

* Inserts: Entire row is stored as a single key-value pair.
* Updates:  If some column(s) are updated, then each such column update is stored as a key-value pair in DocDb (same as without packed rows). However If all non-key columns are updated, then the row is stored in the packed format as one single key-value pair. This scheme adopts the best of both worlds - efficient updates and efficient storage. 

> * Select: Scans need to construct the row from packed inserts as well as non-packed update(s) if any.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Select**: Scans need to construct the row from packed inserts as well as non-packed update(s) if any.
```

> * Compactions: Compactions produce a compact version of the row, if the row has unpacked fragments due to updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Compactions**: Compactions produce a compact version of the row, if the row has unpacked fragments due to updates.
```

> * Backwards compatible: Read code can interpret non-packed format as well. Write/Updates can produce non-packed format as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Backwards compatible**: Read code can interpret non-packed format as well. Write/Updates can produce non-packed format as well.
```

### Performance data

* Sequential scans for table with 1 million rows was 2x faster with packed rows.
* Bulk ingestion of 1 million rows was 2x faster with packed rows.

> ### Limitations

Reviewer: we should add GH issues for these
maybe also worth calling out that colocation + packed is fine, as long as you do not plan to turn on xcluster?

> While packed row feature works for YSQL api using the YSQL specific gflags with most cross features like backup restore, schema changes etc, the following are some of the known limitations an are being worked on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While packed row feature works for YSQL API using the YSQL specific GFlags with most cross features like backup restore, schema changes, and so on, the following are some of the known limitations which are currently under development:
```

* Integration with xCluster and CDC (Beta) - There are some known limitations with schema changes/DDLs and CDC and Packed Row feature.
* Colocated and xCluster - There are some limitations around propagation of schema changes for
  colocated tables in xCluster in the packed row format that are being worked on.

> * Packed row support for YCQL is limited and is still being hardened.

Reviewer: not entirely sure what the best way to showcase this, but we should have some top-level callout, that YSQL is GA as of 2.16.1, but YCQL is beta as of the same, with some open issues (with links to them)

Author: I plan to leave it as beta for now. Will get this out, next week once 2.16.1 is out, Will update the sheet with better guidance.
